So that's what we gonna do.
How do we do all of that stuff?
Right, so let's actually get
into the process that enables us
to deliver on those
solutions to the pitfalls.
And actually it starts even before
you begin sketching an idea or
thinking about design.
From the very very outset when you
first talk to your stakeholders,
I would encourage you to agree on
a set of design principles, okay?
Now this is gonna work slightly
differently depending on whether you work
in house or
whether you work externally, right?
So are you a freelancer or
an agency or if you work in house.
So first of all let's explain
what design principles are.
What design principles are a set
of short statements, right?
That define how you're
gonna go about making
decisions regarding design
during the process.
So for example, a design
statement might be something like,
we make decisions with data not opinion,
right?
That's a great statement that
we can refer back to and go.
Well hang on a minute we're getting
into opinion based territory here,
we said we make decisions with design.
Another might be,
we make it accessible for all, right?
Well, that's a great
idea you've just had Mr.
Stakeholder but actually it's gonna
make the design accessible and
we did agree upfront, we were gonna
make it accessible for all, right?
We do testing, right?
It might be another one.
Well, well the project's really busy,
we're running out of time,
we need to push on with this.
Well hang on, we agreed upfront
that testing was important to us.
Do you get the idea of
why you might do this?
That design principles help move
the decision process away from
people's personal opinions
in the moment and
more towards a framework for
making educated decisions as you go.
So they're really really valuable to have.
And if you wanna learn more
about design principles,
there'll be a link in the slide deck that
enables you to get through to a great site
that's got hundreds and hundreds of
examples of these kinds of things.
So this is just one example.
This is an example that was
produced by the UK government.
They've got a set of ten design
principles that dictate how
they go about doing design.
So for example, some of them
are about designing with data, right?
So they let data drive decision
making not hunches or guesswork.
They've got things like
start with user needs.
That you start by identifying the user
needs and if you don't know what those
user needs are you're not gonna build the
right thing so you need to find out that,
you need to do your research,
you need to talk to users, etc.
So whatever your set of
design principles are,
I think they provide you with a decision
making framework that you can
refer back to in the heat of
the moment when you get into design.
So how do you decide on
your design principles?
Well, there's a couple of approaches that
you can take depending on whether you
work in house or
you work at an agency or a freelancer.
If you work in house and
really I think you need to decide
this organizationally wide, right?
And that obviously
the bigger the organization,
the more complicated that becomes but
essentially what you're looking at doing
is some kind of workshop, all right?
It doesn't need to take very long and
you get effectively stakeholders
from across the organization so
typical stakeholders are involved in
design projects and effectively,
you run a very simple exercise.
So what I normally do when I do this
in-house for organizations is I
go to that website I mentioned
a minute ago called design principles.
And they've got design principles
from hundreds of companies, right?
If your company has got design principles,
they'll be listed on this website.
So I go through and I select say 20 or 30
different design principles from different
companies that I feel like might be
relevant to this particular organization.
And then I put one design principle on
a card so you end up with a stack of 30 to
50 cards with design principles on and
basically we just do some voting, right?
We take the cards and people I give
them say five points to spend or
to mark each card that they think
is good or good design principle.
And they can either spend all their five
points on one card that they think is
really, really important or they could
spread their points around a little bit,
whatever they wanna do.
And we use that to then pick the top
six or so design principles,
have a bit of a discussion around it,
job done, right?
So it doesn't need to be big or
complicated.
If you're a freelancer or
if you run an agency or work at an agency,
then really I would suggest
actually a selling point,
a differentiator for
you as a freelancer or
an agency is to have your own
set of design principles, right?
Because it's very hard to differentiate
yourself as a freelancer or
agencies, I design websites, well,
so do X million other people.
But you can distinguish yourself
from the way you do it, all right?
And your attitudes towards it and
your design principles become
representative of that.
And so if you're in that kind of situation
which of course I am as a freelance
consultant, I will go into a company and
say, look, these are my design principles,
these are how I operate.
Are these in line with your thinking?
And if they wanna tweak and
change them a little bit for
their particular organization,
that's fine.
But as long as it doesn't then completely
conflict with how I see the world and
if it does completely conflict with how I
see the world, then that's a big warning
sign for me that maybe this isn't
a client I wanna work with.
So spending a bit of time agreeing
a set of design principles.
So just to reiterate, design principles
are not the process of how you
build a website but it's about how
you make decisions in the moment.
Those little microdecisions,
whether you go with blue or red, right?
Well, one might be more
accessible than the other or
if there's no real difference
between them, let's test them.
So that's how your design principles
can make a difference within a project.
But what about the kind of process for
running the project as a whole.